# Rebuttal Draft 2:

Saved RM 1238 15 June 18

# Rebuttal number 1

## Originality and potential to advance knowledge in the field

We thank the reviewer for their positive and constructive comments in
this section.

## Appropriateness and feasibility of the study design

> "This data has not been published however"

The pilot has only recently finished and will be submitted to a peer
reviewed journal for publishing in the near future.

> "The support of the Cardiac network and the experience of the research
> team in establishing these pathways and formally assessing outcomes
> enhances the feasibility of the study also."

Thank you for identifying this. The team is experienced in investigating
accelerated chest pain pathways.

> "Reference 14 from the Australasian Association of Clinical
> Biochemists specifically states that POC troponin tests have not been
> validated for accelerated chest pain pathways and advocates use of a
> second 6-8 hour assay (rather than at 2 hours)"

We agree with the statement that point-of-care troponin assays have not
been validated for use in accelerated chest pain pathways. This is the
reason this project has been undertaken. Many (most) rural hospitals
rely on point-of-care assays and require a safe pathway for using them
in the assessment of chest pain to ensure patients are getting the right
treatment and preventing unnecessary investigations and transfers.

The AACB recommend a 6-8 hour repeat test. This recommendation is made
without considering the use of the assay in conjunction with an
objective risk assessment (e.g. EDACS) and a normal ECG. This is how
modern accelerated chest pain pathways use biomarkers. When a
point--of-care troponin is incorporated into an accelerated chest pain
pathway, a 2-hour repeat point-of-care sample has been shown to be safe
(even when using a less sensitive clinical/objective scoring system
(modified TIMI score) than the EDACS scoring system we propose).(1--4)
Contemporary point-of-care troponin assays (with similar performance to
the Abbott iSTAT) have also been shown to compare favourably when
compared to laboratory high-sensitivity assays in nearly 1000 patients
in an urban setting.(5)

> \" I also wonder about the power of the study to answer the question
> primarily about safety , with 95% intervals between 0.25 and 2.56%
> assuming a MACE rate of 1% in 400 patients. Will the numbers be
> sufficient to answer the question ?\"

The power calculations have been performed by A/Professor John Pickering
and are based on data observed from an urban ED cohort.

It is generally accepted that a pathway should have a true 'miss rate'
of 1% or less.(6) This is also what has been observed based on the
current performance of the current pathway (utilising a high-sensitivity
troponin assay in an urban ED) in 2000 patients, where \~40% are
identified as low-risk. The calculations are based on a 1-tailed test.
The null hypothesis is that the true difference is \<2.5% with an alpha
of 0.05 and power of 80%.

400 low-risk patients is therefore sufficient to test this null
hypothesis. The true rate could be less, as seen with the pilot study
where there are 0 MACE in 118 patients.

These numbers are typical for this kind of study. The studies which led
to the adoption of ADPs throughout NZ had similar or fewer low-risk
patients - ASPECT, the prospective observational validation study of a
2h pathway had 352 low-risk, the ADAPT study 392 and the the two RCTs
for ADAPT and EDACS many fewer.(1,4,7,8) Similarly, the studies which
led to the ESC 0/1h guidelines had similar or fewer low-risk patients.

Further, these numbers have been presented to the Cardiac Society and
they have agreed that these numbers will be sufficient for them to adopt
the pathway as a national strategy, should the MACE rate be \<1%.

> "The other aspect of the study that bears consideration is that the
> blood samples will be stored to then be analysed using an improved POC
> testing kit which unfortunately will not become available it seems
> until the latter part of the study (if recruitment begins in September
> 2018) . The data gathered to provide direct comparison in measurements
> with the different assays will be very helpful in integrating the new
> POC assay if it is established to perform appropriately in this
> cohort. It does mean however in the real world setting that the
> majority of the patients in the study are exposed to a POC test that
> has not been as fully validated."

Two referees were unclear about which of the iStat troponin assays
clinicians will use in this study.

Currently there is only one registered (on market) iStat troponin I
assay available for clinical use anywhere in the world. It is this assay
that will be used for the clinical management of patients in this study.
However, we have been collaborating with Abbott Diagnostics in the
development and evaluation of a newer high sensitivity assay for the
iStat.

It is unclear when this assay will be released commercially and we will
not consider using it until it is registered for clinical use in New
Zealand.

We have already performed several studies of the validity of the new
assay and importantly comparisons of the results obtained with the
currently available iStat and the laboratory based Architect assay.

Initial results are very encouraging, showing that the results are
essentially interchangeable but with the new 'high sensitivity' iStat
assay having greatly improved precision at low values.

It is this improvement in precision that allows accurate reporting of
troponin results at values in the range 5 to 80 ug/L. As a consequence
we expect that the new assay will have better performance in identifying
low-risk patients, while also improving the detection of (otherwise
missed) NSTEMI cases.

In this study we will collect samples that will be stored and used to
further validate the new assay. If a sample comparison, and the usual
other laboratory evaluations, confirms acceptable analytical performance
for the new assay AND if the assay is available and registered for use
in New Zealand, consideration will be made to switching to the improved
assay in the clinics.

Before the newer higher sensitive point-of-care assay is used in a
clinical setting, the group must be satisfied that it's performance is
adequate based on testing of the stored samples. Release of this assay
for clinical use is unlikely to be before quarter 3 of 2019, which is
likely to be after the recruitment period finishes. Thus we anticipate
that the current iStat assay being used throughout the study.

There is no currently recognised pathway available for the use of
point-of-care troponin in rural settings (i.e. current use of
point-of-care troponin has not been validated). Many rural hospitals are
still using the manufacturer's cut-off of 0.08 ug/L, which has been
shown to miss NSTEMI.(9,10) The pathway proposed in this trial, will
lower the cut-off improving sensitivity compared to the "standard of
care".

## Appropriateness of the applicant's expertise to meet the requirements of the proposed research (if known)

The lead investigator's inexperience is indeed countered by the vast
experience of the team.

## Comments on the budget or the relevant matters

Thank you for your constructive comments.

# Rebuttal number 2

## Originality and potential to advance knowledge in the field

We agree and thank the reviewer for their comments on the importance of
this project in rural and remote New Zealand

## Appropriateness and feasibility of the study design

> "The pilot study used a range of POC devices, although a single
> device, the Abbott i- STAT will be primarily used in the proposed
> study, with a cut-off of 0.04 ug/L \[together with EDACS and ECG\] for
> assignment of low-risk."

The pilot study used the Abbott i-STAT device in all participating
primary care study sites. This is the same assay that will be used in
this study.

Earlier studies performed by members of this group used different POC
troponin assays.(1,5)

The cut off of 0.04 ug/L is lower than the manufacturer's recommendation
(99th centile) of 0.08 ug/L. Lowering the cutoff has shown to improve
the sensitivity of the assay without compromising specificity too
much.(9) Lowering the cut-off is endorsed by the AACB.(10)

> "The analyses will take place on frozen plasma rather than fresh whole
> blood as would be the intention if/when the newer device is used
> clinically, which is a potential limitation. It is also expected that
> the analyses would be undertaken in batches by expert technical
> operators rather by clinicians under field conditions."

Before exposing the new assay to a clinical environment it is important
to ensure that it is adequately accurate and sensitive. This initial
testing will be done by lab technicians and when the group is satisfied
that the assay performs as desired it will be rolled out to clinical
staff for use in real world clinical conditions. There will be adequate
training provided by Abbott prior to use, of the new assay, in 'the
field'.

However, we note that it is likely that the release of this assay will
be delayed until at least quarter 3 of 2019, after the recruitment of
all patients.

## Appropriateness of the applicant's expertise to meet the requirements of the proposed research (if known)

The lead investigators inexperience is indeed countered by the vast
experience of the team. We thank the review for acknowledging the prior
work of Dr. Than, Associate Professor Pickering regarding accelerated
chest pain pathways and also Dr. Nixon for his expertise in rural
health.

## Comments on the budget or the relevant matters

Again, we would like to thank the reviewer for their comments.

# Rebuttal number 3

## Originality and potential to advance knowledge in the field

> "The rationale is a little unclear"

We are sorry this wasn't clear in our proposal. We are attempting to
establish that accelerated chest pain pathways that use point-of-care
troponin in rural settings are as safe as those pathways used by urban
emergency departments that use high-sensitivity laboratory assays.

As it stands, although the pilot data are promising, there are
insufficient numbers to adequately assess the safety of the pathway.
However the proposed study of 1000 patients has been endorsed by the
National Cardiac Network as adequate to allow them to endorse the a
pathway including POCT troponin,

Once the additional data are available, the Cardiac Network will make
this (rural accelerated chest pain pathway) part of national policy.

> "Is the old less sensitive assay being used??"

Currently there is only one registered (on market) i-STAT troponin I
assay (made by Abbott) available for clinical use anywhere in the world.
It is this assay that will be used for the clinical management of
patients in this study.

The assay is less precise and less sensitive than laboratory based
high-sensitivity troponin assays. When point-of-care assays are combined
with an objective clinical score and an ECG they have been shown to be
as sensitive.(1,5)

We apologise for potentially causing confusion with regards to the newer
higher sensitivity point-of-care assay. We are collecting samples to be
tested in a laboratory setting once the higher sensitive assay becomes
available to show that it is accurate. Once this has been done and the
group are satisfied with the data, it may be rolled out into the study
sites. This is unlikely to occur until Quarter 3 2019.

> "Has there been any economic modelling, is this assay expensive?"

We have consulted Trudy Sullivan, health economist from University of
Otago, Health Research South, for advice and ongoing analysis.

Most rural hospitals are already using the Abbott i-STAT cTn assay, that
will be used in the trial, so there are unlikely to be increased costs
from this (equipment perspective). General practices not currently using
POC Tn will be supplied with equipment from Abbott. Using the Midland's
pilot as an example, ongoing costs were (and are) covered by Abbott and
a "Primary Options" scheme funded by the DHB and PHO. A business model
is being developed to formalise this with DHBs and PHOs moving beyond
this validation study.

For those identified as low-risk, there will be reduced costs due to
reduced patient transfers, shorter emergency department stays and less
unnecessary investigations. There will also be intangible cost reduction
due to reduced travel for family and time off work.

For those identified as medium and high risk, there will likely be
increased short term costs as more people will be potentially identified
as needing treatment, therefore identifying a hitherto unrecognised
rural disparity in the management of NSTEMI. This will be offset by an
important clinical benefit, with appropriate life and morbidity saving
(cost reducing) treatment being instituted earlier. Those with medium
risk may be able to stay 'closer to home' for longer periods thus
reducing costs to the health sector and beyond.

`?adapt figure 3 from proposal?`

## Appropriateness and feasibility of the study design

> "No active follow up is planned just review of hospitalisation
> records. Should there not be at least a phone call at 30 days to
> ensure no subacute symptoms and safety outcomes."

The primary outcome is 30-day major adverse cardiac event. These are
identified as death, cardiac arrest, emergency revascularisation
procedure, cardiogenic shock, ventricular arrhythmia, ventricular
fibrillation, high-degree artioventricular block needing intervention,
or acute myocardial infarction. This is a standard definition and used
in many trials assessing accelerated diagnostic pathways.(5)

None of these conditions would be managed in primary care or at home -
at least not beyond the initial resuscitation stage and therefore would
appear in hospital information systems, National minimal dataset,
ANZACS-QI and National Mortality Collection.

Using NHI records was shown to be effective and accurate for data
collection in over 30000 patients in recording MACE in a trial assessing
the performance of accelerated chest pain pathways.(11)

> "Should this implementation be monitored by a data safety committee??"

This is an observational measured implementation study, not a randomised
controlled trial. It would be very unusual for a change in standard of
clinical care in New Zealand to be monitored by a data safety committee.

This pathway has been shown to be safe (enough) in the pilot that our
group feels confident to proceed without this.

> "Data acquisition is not clear how is the numerator and denominator
> ascertained for the rates mentioned"

We are not clear on what the reviewer means by this statement.

Data will be collected via an 'app' that has been tested in the
Christchurch Hospital emergency department. The app serves a data
collection purpose but also acts as a decision aid helping clinicians to
accurately risk stratify patients into the low, medium and high risk
groups.

Data will be collected for all patients enrolled in the trial who
present with chest pain (the denominator). The numerator will be the
numbers of patients in each group (low, medium, high).

> "there must be some sort of primary care data management,"

Data on low risk patients will be gathered from within the General
Practices practice management system. This was effective in the pilot
study.

## Appropriateness of the applicant's expertise to meet the requirements of the proposed research (if known)

> "The team is experienced, but this experience now has to support rural
> research, so lets hope that happens."

Successful rural health research relies on collaborations of researchers
who understand the rural context working with those who have specialist
skills. The reviewer correctly identifies the risks associated with the
dispersed nature of these teams. All members of the team are aware of
these risks and committed to working closely together.

The team has an experienced rural researcher in Dr. Garry Nixon, who is
committed to rural health and rural academic medicine at the University
of Otago and is the Associate Dean of Rural Health. The principal
investigator is also employed by the rural post-graduate programme at
the University of Otago as an academic.

The wider team has shown their commitment to rural health research with
the recently finished pilot project which was staged in rural Waikato
and will continue to do so.

This study will provide further valuable experience of working together
for both rural and urban researchers.

## Comments on the budget or the relevant matters

> "the cost of Mr Anthony Watson is high and then another RF comes in
> the second year, not mush detail about why"

Experience has shown us that project management of the implementation of
new clinical pathways requires a high level of engagement with
stakeholders. For this reason Anthony has been employed **full-time** to
provide that service. This engagement will be with distant rural and
remote study sites throughout New Zealand. We do not feel the cost is
high considering the work involved and the expertise Anthony brings to
the team.

> "whether continuity with rural teams will be maintained."

Two of the investigators as previously mentioned are involved in direct
clinical care in rural hospitals and rural general practices. The rural
community is small. It is also expected that Anthony Watson will provide
continuity through his role as project manager. Mr. Tim Norman will
provide a role providing continuity through the primary care teams.

# Rebuttal number 4

We would like to thank the referee for their constructive comments in
this report. We agree that this is a project that will change practice
in rural New Zealand, in both primary care and in rural hospitals.
Importantly, we agree that it is feasible with the available resources.
We acknowledge your comments about the lack of experience of the primary
investigator, but he is well supported by a large and experienced team.

# Rebuttal number 5

## Originality and potential to advance knowledge in the field

We thank and agree with the reviewers comments about the importance of
validating this pathway, especially using point-of-care troponin, in the
rural setting.

## Appropriateness and feasibility of the study design

> The POC troponin instrument is an evolution of the existing POC tool
> to now an acceptable level of certainty (as stated in application).

To clarify: the POC troponin assay that will be used in the trial is the
Abbott i-STAT cTnI that is currently available, registered and in-use in
many rural hospitals and general practices in New Zealand. This is the
assay that was used in the pilot.

Blood samples will be collected and stored to test against a new assay
(with higher sensitivity) that will not be available for use until at
least the 3rd quarter of 2019. If this assay performs to the teams
satisfaction during laboratory testing, it will be rolled out to the
study sites.

> The statistical numbers required are of 1000 patients over 11 general
> practices (around 100 patients per practice over 1.5 years) - may take
> longer to recruit this many patients

1000 patients will be recruited from around 20 study sites, half are
likely to be general practices and the other half are rural hospitals.
We anticipate that there will be many more chest pain presentations from
rural hospitals - 20 sites would recruit 1000 patients if there were
only 5 patients per month at each site. By recruiting 1000 patients we
are expecting that there will be 400 low-risk patients.

## Appropriateness of the applicant's expertise to meet the requirements of the proposed research (if known)

We too believe the team has significant experience in chest pain pathway
research and is motivated to support the primary investigator. Thank you
for acknowledging this.

## Comments on the budget or the relevant matters

> ... note that participating staff are contributing their time at no
> charge.

Many of the participating staff are contributing their time at no
charge, however, due to the complicated nature of the logistics and
research, we are employing 2 research fellows and a project manager, as
well as a research nurse to support the research and the study sites.

> Abbott have provided \$150,000, half of the cost of their assay?

Abbott have provided funds to install the hardware in study sites and
fund the consumables (cartridges, QA testing etc.) as well as provide
support with the IT and any ongoing 'trouble-shooting'.

# References

1\. Than M, Cullen L, Reid CM, Lim SH, Aldous S, Ardagh MW, et al. A 2-h
diagnostic protocol to assess patients with chest pain symptoms in the
Asia-Pacific region (ASPECT): A prospective observational validation
study. 2011;377:8.

2\. Flaws D, Than M, Scheuermeyer FX, Christenson J, Boychuk B,
Greenslade JH, et al. External validation of the emergency department
assessment of chest pain score accelerated diagnostic pathway
(EDACS-ADP). Emergency Medicine Journal. 2016 Sep;33(9):618--25.

3\. Roche T, Jennings N, Clifford S, O'connell J, Lutze M, Gosden E, et
al. Review article: Diagnostic accuracy of risk stratification tools for
patients with chest pain in the rural emergency department: A systematic
review. Emergency Medicine Australasia. 2016 Oct;28(5):511--24.

4\. Than M, Flaws D, Sanders S, Doust J, Glasziou P, Kline J, et al.
Development and validation of the Emergency Department Assessment of
Chest pain Score and 2 h accelerated diagnostic protocol: Emergency
Department Assessment of Chest pain Score. Emergency Medicine
Australasia. 2014 Feb;26(1):34--44.

5\. Aldous S, Mark Richards A, George PM, Cullen L, Parsonage WA, Flaws
D, et al. Comparison of new point-of-care troponin assay with high
sensitivity troponin in diagnosing myocardial infarction. International
Journal of Cardiology. 2014 Nov;177(1):182--6.

6\. Than M, Herbert M, Flaws D, Cullen L, Hess E, Hollander JE, et al.
What is an acceptable risk of major adverse cardiac event in chest pain
patients soon after discharge from the Emergency Department?
International Journal of Cardiology. 2013 Jul;166(3):752--4.

7\. Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, Lefebvre CW, Nicks BA, Cline DM,
et al. Chest Pain Risk Stratification: A Comparison of the 2-Hour
Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol (ADAPT) and the HEART Pathway. Critical
Pathways in Cardiology. 2016 Jun;15(2):46.

8\. Than MP, Pickering JW, Aldous SJ, Cullen L, Frampton CM, Peacock WF,
et al. Effectiveness of EDACS Versus ADAPT Accelerated Diagnostic
Pathways for Chest Pain: A Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Trial
Embedded Within Practice. Annals of Emergency Medicine. 2016
Jul;68(1):93--102.e1.

9\. Schneider HG, Ablitt P, Taylor J. Improved sensitivity of point of
care troponin I values using reporting to below the 99th percentile of
normals. Clinical Biochemistry. 2013 Aug;46(12):979--82.

10\. Simpson P. Recommendations for Use of Point-of-Care (POC) Troponin
Assays in Assessment of Acute Coronary Syndrome. 2016;33.

11\. Than MP, Pickering JW, Dryden JM, Lord SJ, Aitken SA, Aldous SJ, et
al. ICare-ACS (Improving Care Processes for Patients With Suspected
Acute Coronary Syndrome): A Study of Cross-System Implementation of a
National Clinical Pathway. Circulation. 2018 Jan;137(4):354--63.
